Dissociative Identity Disorder
Diagnostic Criteria 300.14 (F44.81)
A. Disruption of identity characterized by two or more distinct personality states, which
may be described in some cultures as an experience of possession. The disruption in
identity involves marked discontinuity in sense of self and sense of agency, accompanied by related alterations in affect, behavior, consciousness, memory, perception,
cognition, and/or sensory-motor functioning. These signs and symptoms may be observed by others or reported by the individual.
B. Recurrent gaps in the recall of everyday events, important personal information, and/
or traumatic events that are inconsistent with ordinary forgetting.
C. The symptoms cause clinically significant distress or impairment in social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning.
D. The disturbance is not a normal part of a broadly accepted cultural or religious practice.
Note: In children, the symptoms are not better explained by imaginary playmates or
other fantasy play.
E. The symptoms are not attributable to the physiological effects of a substance (e.g.,
blacl<outs or chaotic behavior during alcohol intoxication) or another medical condition
(e.g., complex partial seizures).
Diagnostic Features
The defining feature of dissociative identity disorder is the presence of two or more distinct personality states or an experience of possession (Criterion A). The overtness or
covertness of these personality states, however, varies as a function of psychological
motivation, current level of stress, culture, internal conflicts and dynamics, and emotional
resilience. Sustained periods of identity disruption may occur when psychosocial pressures are severe and/or prolonged. In many possession-form cases of dissociative identity
disorder, and in a small proportion of non-possession-form cases, manifestations of alternate identities are highly overt. Most individuals with non-possession-form dissociative
identity disorder do not overtly display their discontinuity of identity for long periods of
time; only a small minority present to clinical attention with observable alternation of
identities. When alternate personality states are not directly observed, the disorder can be
identified by two clusters of symptoms: 1) sudden alterations or discontinuities in sense of
self and sense οί agency (Criterion A), and 2) recurrent dissociative amnesias (Criterion B).
Criterion A symptoms are related to discontinuities of experience that can affect any
aspect of an individual's functioning. Individuals v^ith dissociative identity disorder may
report the feeling that they have suddenly become depersonalized observers of their
"own" speech and actions, which they may feel powerless to stop (sense of self). Such individuals may also report perceptions of voices (e.g., a child's voice; crying; the voice of a
spiritual being). In some cases, voices are experienced as multiple, perplexing, independent thought streams over which the individual experiences no control. Strong emotions,
impulses, and even speech or other actions may suddenly emerge, without a sense of personal ownership or control (sense of agency). These emotions and impulses are frequently
reported as ego-dystonic and puzzling. Attitudes, outlooks, and personal preferences
(e.g., about food, activities, dress) may suddenly shift and then shift back. Individuals may
report that their bodies feel different (e.g., like a small child, like the opposite gender, huge
and muscular). Alterations in sense of self and loss of personal agency may be accompanied by a feeling that these attitudes, emotions, and behaviors—even one's body—are
"not mine" and/or are "not under my control." Although most Criterion A symptoms are
subjective, many of these sudden discontinuities in speech, affect, and behavior can be witnessed by family, friends, or the clinician. Non-epileptic seizures and other conversion
symptoms are prominent in some presentations of dissociative identity disorder, especially in some non-Westem settings.
The dissociative amnesia of individuals with dissociative identity disorder manifests in
three primary ways: as 1) gaps in remote memory of personal life events (e.g., periods of
childhood or adolescence; some important life events, such as the death of a grandparent,
getting married, giving birth); 2) lapses in dependable memory (e.g., of what happened
today, of well-leamed skills such as how to do their job, use a computer, read, drive); and
3) discovery of evidence of their everyday actions and tasks that they do not recollect doing (e.g., finding unexplained objects in their shopping bags or among their possessions;
finding perplexing writings or drawings that they must have created; discovering injuries;
"coming to" in the midst of doing something). Dissociative fugues, wherein the person
discovers dissociated travel, are common. Thus, individuals with dissociative identity disorder may report that they have suddenly found themselves at the beach, at work, in a nightclub, or somewhere at home (e.g., in the closet, on a bed or sofa, in the corner) with no
memory of how they came to be there. Amnesia in individuals with dissociative identity disorder is not limited to stressful or traumatic events; these individuals often cannot recall
everyday events as well.
Individuals with dissociative identity disorder vary in their awareness and attitude toward their amnesias. It is common for these individuals to minimize their amnestic symptoms. Some of their amnestic behaviors may be apparent to others—as when these persons
do not recall something they were witnessed to have done or said, when they cannot
remember their own name, or when they do not recognize their spouse, children, or close
friends.
Possession-form identities in dissociative identity disorder typically manifest as behaviors that appear as if a "spirit," supernatural being, or outside person has taken control,
such that the individual begins speaking or acting in a distinctly different manner. For example, an individual's behavior may give the appearance that her identity has been
replaced by the "ghost" of a girl who committed suicide in the same community years
before, speaking and acting as though she were still alive. Or an individual may be "taken
over" by a demon or deity, resulting in profound impairment, and demanding that the individual or a relative be punished for a past act, followed by more subtle periods of identity alteration. However, the majority of possession states around the world are normal,
usually part of spiritual practice, and do not meet criteria for dissociative identity disor-
der. The identities that arise during possession-form dissociative identity disorder present
recurrently, are unvs^anted and involuntary, cause clinically significant distress or impairment (Criterion C), and are not a normal part of a broadly accepted cultural or religious
practice (Criterion D).
Associated Features Supporting Diagnosis
Individuals with dissociative identity disorder typically present v^ith comorbid depression,
anxiety, substance abuse, self-injury, non-epileptic seizures, or another common symptom. They often conceal, or are not fully aware of, disruptions in consciousness, amnesia,
or other dissociative symptoms. Many individuals with dissociative identity disorder report dissociative flashbacks during which they undergo a sensory reliving of a previous
event as though it were occurring in the present, often with a change of identity, a partial
or complete loss of contact with or disorientation to current reality during the flashback,
and a subsequent amnesia for the content of the flashback. Individuals with the disorder
typically report multiple types of interpersonal maltreatment during childhood and adulthood. Nonmaltreatment forms of overwhelming early life events, such as multiple long,
painful, early-life medical procedures, also may be reported. Self-mutilation and suicidal
behavior are frequent. On standardized measures, these individuals report higher levels
of hypnotizability and dissociativity compared with other clinical groups and healthy control subjects. Some individuals experience transient psychotic phenomena or episodes.
Several brain regions have been implicated in the pathophysiology of dissociative identity
disorder, including the orbitofrontal cortex, hippocampus, parahippocampal gyrus, and
amygdala.
Prevalence
The 12-month prevalence of dissociative identity disorder among adults in a small U.S.
community study was 1.5%. The prevalence across genders in that study was 1.6% for
males and 1.4% for females.
Development and Course
Dissociative identity disorder is associated with overwhelming experiences, traumatic
events, and/or abuse occurring in childhood. The full disorder may first manifest at almost any age (from earliest childhood to late life). Dissociation in children may generate
problems with memory, concentration, attachment, and traumatic play. Nevertheless, children usually do not present with identity changes; instead they present primarily with overlap and interference among mental states (Criterion A phenomena), wiüi symptoms related
to discontinuities of experience. Sudden changes in identity during adolescence may appear to be just adolescent turmoil or the early stages of another mental disorder. Older
individuals may present to treatment with what appear to be late-life mood disorders, obsessive-compulsive disorder, paranoia, psychotic mood disorders, or even cognitive disorders due to dissociative amnesia. In some cases, disruptive affects and memories may
increasingly intrude into awareness with advancing age.
Psychological decompensation and overt changes in identity may be triggered by 1) removal from the traumatizing situation (e.g., through leaving home); 2) the individual's
children reaching the same age at which the individual was originally abused or traumatized; 3) later traumatic experiences, even seemingly inconsequential ones, like a minor
motor vehicle accident; or 4) the death of, or the onset of a fatal illness in, their abuser(s).
Risk and Prognostic Factors
Environmental. Inteφersonal physical and sexual abuse is associated with an increased
risk of dissociative identity disorder. Prevalence of childhood abuse and neglect in the
United States, Canada, and Europe among those with the disorder is about 90%. Other
forms of traumatizing experiences, including childhood medical and surgical procedures,
war, childhood prostitution, and terrorism, have been reported.
Course modifiers. Ongoing abuse, later-life retraumatization, comorbidity with mental
disorders, severe medical illness, and delay in appropriate treatment are associated with
poorer prognosis.
Culture-Related Diagnostic issues
Many features of dissociative identity disorder can be influenced by the individual's cultural background. Individuals with this disorder may present with prominent medically
unexplained neurological symptoms, such as non-epileptic seizures, paralyses, or sensory
loss, in cultural settings where such symptoms are common. Similarly, in settings where
normative possession is common (e.g., rural areas in the developing world, among certain
religious groups in the United States and Europe), the fragmented identities may take the
form of possessing spirits, deities, demons, animals, or mythical figures. Acculturation or
prolonged intercultural contact may shape the characteristics of the other identities (e.g.,
identities in India may speak English exclusively and wear Western clothes). Possessionform dissociative identity disorder can be distinguished from culturally accepted possession states in that the former is involuntary, distressing, uncontrollable, and often recurrent or persistent; involves conflict between the individual and his or her surrounding
family, social, or work milieu; and is manifested at times and in places that violate the
norms of the culture or religion.
Gender-Related Diagnostic issues
Females with dissociative identity disorder predominate in adult clinical settings but not
in child clinical settings. Adult males with dissociative identity disorder may deny their
symptoms and trauma histories, and this can lead to elevated rates of false negative diagnosis. Females with dissociative identity disorder present more frequently with acute
dissociative states (e.g., flashbacks, amnesia, fugue, functional neurological [conversion]
symptoms, hallucinations, self-mutilation). Males commonly exhibit more criminal or violent behavior than females; among males, common triggers of acute dissociative states include combat, prison conditions, and physical or sexual assaults.
Suicide Risk
Over 70% of outpatients with dissociative identity disorder have attempted suicide; multiple attempts are common, and other self-injurious behavior is frequent. Assessment of
suicide risk may be complicated when there is amnesia for past suicidal behavior or when
the presenting identity does not feel suicidal and is unaware that other dissociated identities do.
Functional Consequences of
Dissociative identity Disorder
Impairment varies widely, from apparently minimal (e.g., in high-functioning professionals) to profound. Regardless of level of disability, individuals with dissociative identity
disorder commonly minimize the impact of their dissociative and posttraumatic symptoms. The symptoms of higher-functioning individuals may impair their relational, marital, family, and parenting functions more than their occupational and professional life
(although the latter also may be affected). With appropriate treatment, many impaired individuals show marked improvement in occupational and personal functioning. However, some remain highly impaired in most activities of living. These individuals may only
respond to treatment very slowly, with gradual reduction in or improved tolerance of
their dissociative and posttraumatic symptoms. Long-term supportive treatment may
slowly increase these individuals' ability to manage their symptoms and decrease use of
more restrictive levels of care.
Differential Diagnosis
Other specified dissociative disorder. The core of dissociative identity disorder is the
division of identity, v^ith recurrent disruption of conscious functioning and sense of self.
This central feature is shared with one form of other specified dissociative disorder, which
may be distinguished from dissociative identity disorder by the presence of chronic or recurrent mixed dissociative symptoms that do not meet Criterion A for dissociative identity
disorder or are not accompanied by recurrent amnesia.
Major depressive disorder. Individuals with dissociative identity disorder are often depressed, and their symptoms may appear to meet the criteria for a major depressive episode.
Rigorous assessment indicates that this depression in some cases does not meet full criteria for
major depressive disorder. Other specified depressive disorder in individuals with dissociative identity disorder often has an important feature: the depressed mood and cognitions fluctuate because they are experienced in some identity states but not others.
Bipolar disorders. Individuals with dissociative identity disorder are often misdiagnosed with a bipolar disorder, most often bipolar II disorder. The relatively rapid shifts in
mood in individuals with this disorder—typically within minutes or hours, in contrast to
the slower mood changes typically seen in individuals with bipolar disorders—are due to
the rapid, subjective shifts in mood commonly reported across dissociative states, sometimes accompanied by fluctuation in levels of activation. Furthermore, in dissociative
identity disorder, elevated or depressed mood may be displayed in conjunction with overt
identities, so one or the other mood may predominate for a relatively long period of time
(often for days) or may shift within minutes.
Posttraumatic stress disorder. Some traumatized individuals have both posttraumatic
stress disorder (PTSD) and dissociative identity disorder. Accordingly, it is crucial to distinguish between individuals with PTSD only and individuals who have both PTSD and
dissociative identity disorder. This differential diagnosis requires that the clinician establish the presence or absence of dissociative symptoms that are not characteristic of acute
stress disorder or PTSD. Some individuals with PTSD manifest dissociative symptoms that
also occur in dissociative identity disorder: 1) amnesia for some aspects of trauma, 2) dissociative flashbacks (i.e., reliving of the trauma, with reduced awareness of one's current
orientation), and 3) symptoms of intrusion and avoidance, negative alterations in cognition and mood, and hyperarousal that are focused around the traumatic event. On the other
hand, individuals with dissociative identity disorder manifest dissociative symptoms that
are not a manifestation of PTSD: 1) amnesias for many everyday (i.e., nontraumatic) events,
2) dissociative flashbacks that may be followed by amnesia for the content of the flashback,
3) disruptive intrusions (unrelated to traumatic material) by dissociated identity states
into the individual's sense of self and agency, and 4) infrequent, full-blown changes
among different identity states.
Psychotic disorders. Dissociative identity disorder may be confused with schizophrenia or other psychotic disorders. The personified, internally communicative inner voices
of dissociative identity disorder, especially of a child (e.g., "I hear a little girl crying in a
closet and an angry man yelling at her"), may be mistaken for psychotic hallucinations.
Dissociative experiences of identity fragmentation or possession, and of perceived loss of
control over thoughts, feelings, impulses, and acts, may be confused with signs of formal
thought disorder, such as thought insertion or withdrawal. Individuals with dissociative
identity disorder may also report visual, tactile, olfactory, gustatory, and somatic hallucinations, which are usually related to posttraumatic and dissociative factors, such as partial
flashbacks. Individuals with dissociative identity disorder experience these symptoms as
caused by alternate identities, do not have delusional explanations for the phenomena,
and often describe the symptoms in a personified way (e.g., "I feel like someone else wants
to cry with my eyes"). Persecutory and derogatory internal voices in dissociative identity
disorder associated with depressive symptoms may be misdiagnosed as major depression
with psychotic features. Chaotic identity change and acute intrusions that disrupt thought
processes may be distinguished from brief psychotic disorder by the predominance of dissociative symptoms and amnesia for the episode, and diagnostic evaluation after cessation
of the crisis can help confirm the diagnosis.
Substance/medication-induced disorders. Symptoms associated with the physiological
effects of a substance can be distinguished from dissociative identity disorder if the substance in question is judged to be etiologically related to the disturbance.
Personality disorders. Individuals with dissociative identity disorder often present identities that appear to encapsulate a variety of severe personality disorder features, suggesting a
differential diagnosis of personality disorder, especially of tiie borderline type. Importantly,
however, the individual's longitudinal variability in personality style (due to inconsistency
among identities) differs from the pervasive and persistent dysfunction in affect management
and inteφersonal relationships typical of those with personality disorders.
Conversion disorder (functional neurological symptom disorder). This disorder may be
distinguished from dissociative identity disorder by the absence of an identity disruption
characterized by two or more distinct personality states or an experience of possession.
Dissociative amnesia in conversion disorder is more limited and circumscribed (e.g., amnesia for a non-epileptic seizure).
Seizure disorders. Individuals with dissociative identity disorder may present with seizurelike symptoms and behaviors that resemble complex partial seizures with temporal
lobe foci. These include déjà vu, jamais vu, depersonalization, derealization, out-of-body
experiences, amnesia, disruptions of consciousness, hallucinations, and other intrusion
phenomena of sensation, affect, and thought. Normal electroencephalographic findings,
including telemetry, differentiate non-epileptic seizures from the seizurelike symptoms of
dissociative identity disorder. Also, individuals with dissociative identity disorder obtain
very high dissociation scores, whereas individuals with complex partial seizures do not.
Factitious disorder and malingering. Individuals who feign dissociative identity disorder do not report the subtle symptoms of intrusion characteristic of the disorder; instead
they tend to overreport well-publicized symptoms of the disorder, such as dissociative
amnesia, while underreporting less-publicized comorbid symptoms, such as depression.
Individuals who feign dissociative identity disorder tend to be relatively undisturbed by
or may even seem to enjoy "having" the disorder. In contrast, individuals with genuine
dissociative identity disorder tend to be ashamed of and overwhelmed by their symptoms
and to underreport their symptoms or deny their condition. Sequential observation, corroborating history, and intensive psychometric and psychological assessment may be
helpful in assessment.
Individuals who malinger dissociative identity disorder usually create limited, stereotyped alternate identities, with feigned amnesia, related to the events for which gain is
sought. For example, they may present an "all-good" identity and an "all-bad" identity in
hopes of gaining exculpation for a crime.
Comorbidity
Many individuals with dissociative identity disorder present with a comorbid disorder. If
not assessed and treated specifically for the dissociative disorder, these individuals often
receive prolonged treatment for the comorbid diagnosis only, with limited overall treatment response and resultant demoralization, and disability.
Individuals with dissociative identity disorder usually exhibit a large number of comorbid disorders. In particular, most develop PTSD. Other disorders that are highly comorbid with dissociative identity disorder include depressive disorders, trauma- and
stressor-related disorders, personality disorders (especially avoidant and borderline personality disorders), conversion disorder (functional neurological symptom disorder),
somatic symptom disorder, eating disorders, substance-related disorders, obsessivecompulsive disorder, and sleep disorders. Dissociative alterations in identity, memory,
and consciousness may affect the symptom presentation of comorbid disorders.
Dissociative Amnesia
Diagnostic Criteria 300.12 (F44.0)
A. An inability to recall important autobiographical information, usually of a traumatic or
stressful nature, that is inconsistent with ordinary forgetting.
Note: Dissociative amnesia most often consists of localized or selective amnesia for a
specific event or events; or generalized amnesia for identity and life history.
B. The symptoms cause clinically significant distress or impairment in social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning.
C. The disturbance is not attributable to the physiological effects of a substance (e.g., alcohol or other drug of abuse, a medication) or a neurological or other medical condition
(e.g., partial complex seizures, transient global amnesia, sequelae of a closed head injury/traumatic brain injury, other neurological condition).
D. The disturbance is not better explained by dissociative identity disorder, posttraumatic
stress disorder, acute stress disorder, somatic symptom disorder, or major or mild neurocognitive disorder.
Coding note: The code for dissociative amnesia without dissociative fugue is 300.12
(F44.0). The code for dissociative amnesia with dissociative fugue is 300.13 (F44.1).
Specify if ;
300.13 (F44.1) With dissociative fugue: Apparently purposeful travel or bewildered
wandering that is associated with amnesia for identity or for other important autobiographical information.___________________________________________________
Diagnostic Features
The defining characteristic of dissociative amnesia is an inability to recall important autobiographical information that 1) should be successfully stored in memory and 2) ordinarily would be readily remembered (Criterion A). Dissociative amnesia differs from the
permanent amnesias due to neurobiological damage or toxicity that prevent memory storage or retrieval in that it is always potentially reversible because the memory has been successfully stored.
Localized amnesia, a failure to recall events during a circumscribed period of time, is the
most common form of dissociative amnesia. Localized amnesia may be broader than amnesia for a single traumatic event (e.g., months or years associated with child abuse or intense combat). In selective amnesia, the individual can recall some, but not all, of the events
during a circumscribed period of time. Thus, the individual may remember part of a traumatic event but not other parts. Some individuals report both localized and selective amnesias.
Generalized amnesia, a complete loss of memory for one's life history, is rare. Individuals
with generalized amnesia may forget personal identity. Some lose previous knowledge
about the world (i.e., semantic knowledge) and can no longer access well-learned skills
(i.e., procedural knowledge). Generalized amnesia has an acute onset; the perplexity, disorientation, an4 purposeless wandering of individuals with generalized amnesia usually
bring them to the attention of the police or psychiatric emergency services. Generalized
amnesia may be more common among combat veterans, sexual assault victims, and individuals experiencing extreme emotional stress or conflict.
Individuals with dissociative amnesia are frequently unaware (or only partially aware)
of their memory problems. Many, especially those with localized amnesia, minimize the
importance of their memory loss and may become uncomfortable when prompted to address it. In systematized amnesia, the individual loses memory for a specific category of information (e.g., all memories relating to one's family, a particular person, or childhood
sexual abuse). In continuous amnesia, an individual forgets each new event as it occurs.
Associated Features Supporting Diagnosis
Many individuals with dissociative amnesia are chronically impaired in their ability to
form and sustain satisfactory relationships. Histories of trauma, child abuse, and victimization are common. Some individuals with dissociative amnesia report dissociative flashbacks (i.e., behavioral reexperiencing of traumatic events). Many have a history of selfmutilation, suicide attempts, and other high-risk behaviors. Depressive and functional
neurological symptoms are common, as are depersonalization, auto-hypnotic symptoms,
and high hypnotizability. Sexual dysfunctions are common. Mild traumatic brain injury
may precede dissociative amnesia.
Prevalence
The 12-month prevalence for dissociative amnesia among adults in a small U.S. community study was 1.8% (1.0% for males; 2.6% for females).
Development and Course
Onset of generalized amnesia is usually sudden. Less is known about the onset of localized
and selective amnesias because these amnesias are seldom evident, even to the individual.
Although overwhelming or intolerable events typically precede localized amnesia, its onset may be delayed for hours, days, or longer.
Individuals may report multiple episodes of dissociative amnesia. A single episode
may predispose to future episodes. In between episodes of amnesia, the individual may or
may not appear to be acutely symptomatic. The duration of the forgotten events can range
from minutes to decades. Some episodes of dissociative amnesia resolve rapidly (e.g.,
when the person is removed from combat or some other stressful situation), whereas other
episodes persist for long periods of time. Some individuals may gradually recall the dissociated memories years later. Dissociative capacities may decline with age, but not always. As the amnesia remits, there may be considerable distress, suicidal behavior, and
symptoms of posttrauma tic stress disorder (PTSD).
Dissociative amnesia has been observed in young children, adolescents, and adults.
Children may be the most difficult to evaluate because they often have difficulty understanding questions about amnesia, and interviewers may find it difficult to formulate childfriendly questions about memory and amnesia. Observations of apparent dissociative amnesia are often difficult to differentiate from inattention, absorption, anxiety, oppositional
behavior, and learning disorders. Reports from several different sources (e.g., teacher,
therapist, case worker) may be needed to diagnose amnesia in children.
Risl( and Prognostic Factors
Environmental. Single or repeated traumatic experiences (e.g., war, childhood maltreatment, natural disaster, internment in concentration camps, genocide) are common ante­
cedents. Dissociative amnesia is more likely to occur with 1) a greater number of adverse
childhood experiences, particularly physical and/or sexual abuse, 2) interpersonal violence; and 3) increased severity, frequency, and violence of the trauma.
Genetic and physiological. There are no genetic studies of dissociative amnesia. Studies of dissociation report significant genetic and environmental factors in both clinical and
nonclinical samples.
Course modifiers. Removal from the traumatic circumstances underlying the dissociative
amnesia (e.g., combat) may bring about a rapid return of memory. The memory loss of individuals with dissociative fugue may be particularly refractory. Onset of PTSD symptoms may
decrease localized, selective, or systematized amnesia. The returning memory, however, may
be experienced as flashbacks that alternate with amnesia for the content of the flashbacks.
Culture-Related Diagnostic issues
In Asia, the Middle East, and Latin America, non-epileptic seizures and other functional
neurological symptoms may accompany dissociative amnesia. In cultures with highly restrictive social traditions, the précipitants of dissociative amnesia often do not involve
frank trauma. Instead, the amnesia is preceded by severe psychological stresses or conflicts (e.g., marital conflict, other family disturbances, attachment problems, conflicts due
to restriction or oppression).
Suicide Risk
Suicidal and other self-destructive behaviors are common in individuals with dissociative
amnesia. Suicidal behavior may be a particular risk when the amnesia remits suddenly
and overwhelms the individual with intolerable memories.
Functional Consequences of Dissociative Amnesia
The impairment of individuals with localized, selective, or systematized dissociative amnesia ranges from limited to severe. Individuals with chronic generalized dissociative amnesia usually have impairment in all aspects of functioning. Even when these individuals
"re-leam" aspects of their life history, autobiographical memory remains very impaired.
Most become vocationally and interpersonally disabled.
Differential Diagnosis
Dissociative identity disorder. Individuals with dissociative amnesia may report depersonalization and auto-hypnotic symptoms. Individuals with dissociative identity disorder report pervasive discontinuities in sense of self and agency, accompanied by many
other dissociative symptoms. The amnesias of individuals with localized, selective, and/
or systematized dissociative amnesias are relatively stable. Anmesias in dissociative identity disorder include amnesia for everyday events, finding of unexplained possessions,
sudden fluctuations in skills and knowledge, major gaps in recall of life history, and brief
amnesic gaps in interpersonal interactions.
Posttraumatic stress disorder. Some individuals with PTSD cannot recall part or all of
a specific traumatic event (e.g., a rape victim with depersonalization and/or derealization
symptoms who cannot recall most events for the entire day of the rape). When that amnesia extends beyond the immediate time of the trauma, a comorbid diagnosis of dissociative
amnesia is warranted.
Neurocognitive disorders. In neurocognitive disorders, memory loss for personal information is usually embedded in cognitive, linguistic, affective, attentional, and behavioral
disturbances. In dissociative amnesia, memory deficits are primarily for autobiographical
information; intellectual and cognitive abilities are preserved.
Substance-related disorders. In the context of repeated intoxication with alcohol or
other substances/medications, there may be episodes of "^lack outs" or periods for which the
individual has no memory. To aid in distinguishing these episodes from dissociative amnesia, a longitudinal history noting that the amnestic episodes occur only in the context of
intoxication and do not occur in other situations would help identify the source as substance-induced; however the distinction may be difficult when the individual with dissociative amnesia may also misuse alcohol or other substances in the context of stressful
situations that may also exacerbate dissociative symptoms. Some individuals with comorbid dissociative amnesia and substance use disorders will attribute their memory problems solely to the substance use. Prolonged use of alcohol or other substances may result in
a substance-induced neurocognitive disorder that may be associated with impaired cognitive function, but in this context the protracted history of substance use and the persistent deficits associated with the neurocognitive disorder would serve to distinguish it
from dissociative amnesia, where there is typically no evidence of persistent impairment in
intellectual functioning.
Posttraumatic amnesia due to brain injury. Amnesia may occur in the context of a traumatic brain injury (TBI) when there has been an impact to the head or other mechaiüsms of
rapid movement or displacement of the brain within the skull TBI. Other characteristics of
TBI include loss of consciousness, disorientation and confusion, or, in more severe cases,
neurological signs (e.g., abnormalities on neuroimaging, a new onset of seizures or a marked
worsening of a preexisting seizure disorder, visual field cuts, anosmia). A neurocognitive
disorder attributable to TBI must present either immediately after brain injury occurs or immediately after the individual recovers consciousness after the injury, and persist past the
acute post-injury period. The cognitive presentation of a neurocognitive disorder following
TBI is variable and includes difficulties in the domains of complex attention, executive function, learning and memory as well as slowed speed of information processing and disturbances in social cognition. These additional features help distinguish it from dissociative
amnesia.
Seizure disorders. Individuals with seizure disorders may exhibit complex behavior during seizures or post-ictally with subsequent amnesia. Some individuals with a seizure disorder
engage in nonpurposive wandering that is limited to the period of seizure activity. Conversely, behavior during a dissociative fugue is usually purposeful, complex, and goaldirected and may last for days, weeks, or longer. Occasionally, individuals with a seizure disorder will report that earlier autobiographical memories have been "wiped out" as the seizure
disorder progresses. Such memory loss is not associated with traumatic circumstances and appears to occur randomly. Serial electroencephalograms usually show abnormalities. Telemetric electroencephalographic monitoring usually shows an association between the episodes of
amnesia and seizure activity. Dissociative and epileptic amnesias may coexist.
Catatonic stupor. Mutism in catatonic stupor may suggest dissociative amnesia, but failure of recall is absent. Other catatonic symptoms (e.g., rigidity, posturing, negativism) are
usually present.
Factitious disorder and malingering. There is no test, battery of tests, or set of procedures
that invariably distinguishes dissociative amnesia from feigned amnesia. Individuals with
factitious disorder or malingering have been noted to continue their deception even during
hypnotic or barbiturate-facilitated interviews. Feigned amnesia is more common in individuals with 1) acute, florid dissociative amnesia; 2) financial, sexual, or legal problems; or 3) a
wish to escape stressful circumstances. True amnesia can be associated with those same circumstances. Many individuals who malinger confess spontaneously or when confronted.
Normal and age-related changes in memory. Memory decrements in major and mild
neurocognitive disorders differ from those of dissociative amnesia, which are usually associated with stressful events and are more specific, extensive, and/or complex.
Comorbidity
As dissociative anmesia begins to remit, a wide variety of affective phenomena may surface: dysphoria, grief, rage, shame, guilt, psychological conflict and turmoil, and suicidal
and homicidal ideation, impulses, and acts. These individuals may have symptoms that
then meet diagnostic criteria for persistent depressive disorder (dysthymia); major depressive disorder; other specified or unspecified depressive disorder; adjustment disorder, with depressed mood; or adjustment disorder, with mixed disturbance of emotions
and conduct. Many individuals with dissociative amnesia develop PTSD at some point
during their life, especially when the traumatic antecedents of their amnesia are brought
into conscious awareness.
Many individuals with dissociative amnesia have symptoms that meet diagnostic criteria for a comorbid somatic symptom or related disorder (and vice versa), including somatic symptom disorder and conversion disorder (functional neurological symptom
disorder). Many individuals with dissociative amnesia have symptoms that meet diagnostic criteria for a perso



Alcohol Intoxication
Diagnostic Criteria
A. Recent ingestion of alcohol.
B. Clinically significant problematic beliavioral or psychological changes (e.g., inappropriate sexual or aggressive behavior, mood lability, impaired judgment) that developed
during, or shortly after, alcohol ingestion.
C. One (or more) of the following signs or symptoms developing during, or shortly after,
alcohol use:
1. Slurred speech.
2. Incoordination.
3. Unsteady gait.
4. Nystagmus.
5. Impairment in attention or memory.
6. Stupor or coma.
D. The signs or symptoms are not attributable to another medical condition and are not better
explained by another mental disorder, including intoxication with another substance.
Coding note: The ICD-9-CM code is 303.00. The ICD-10-CM code depends on whether
there is a comorbid alcohol use disorder. If a mild alcohol use disorder is comorbid, the
ICD-10-CM code is FI 0.129, and if a moderate or severe alcohol use disorder is comorbid,
the ICD-10-CM code is FI 0.229. If there is no comorbid alcohol use disorder, then the
ICD-10-CM code is F10.929._______________________________________________
Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of alcohol intoxication is the presence of clinically significant problematic
behavioral or psychological changes (e.g., inappropriate sexual or aggressive behavior, mood
lability, impaired judgment, impaired social or occupational functioning) that develop during,
or shortly after, alcohol ingestion (Criterion B). These changes are accompanied by evidence of